This folder stores a set of examples of cythonized code that substantially improved the code's performance.

### Reasons for Cython's performance improvement

Aspects where Cython improves the code substantially.

1. **Function call overhead**: Python API call is quite slow if compared to the optimized C extension generated by Cython.
2. **Looping**: Python loops a notoriously slow. Translating the python `for` and `while` loops to C code will often optimize the loop on two orders of magnitude.
3. **Math Operations**: Dynamically typed, Python needs to lookup the types of variables for a simple `a + b` operation. Compiled languages compiles this simple sum into just one machine code instruction. 
4. **Stack vs Heap Allocation**: As a rule, stack allocation is much faster than heap allocation. 



### Cython Limitations

Cython can only substantially improve **CPU-bound** programs.

* I/O bound or network-bound programs can't be simply optimize only with Cython code.
* Numeric imprecision from C data-types



### Cython vs JIT Compilers

I have compiled a set of arguments in favor and against the use of Cython, compared with current solutions for Python code optimization.

**Against Cython.** In general, Cython is **not as easy** to use as JIT compilers, given that it typically relies on inline static type declarations to generate efficient code.

**Pro.** On the other hand, because JIT compilers stress ease of use and work with pure-Python code, they do not provide the same level of **control** that a hybrid language like Cython does. 

- Cython also does not place any runtime dependencies on end users. 



#### Numba

**Pro Cython.** Numba is focused on speeding up array-oriented and math-heavy Python. Therefore, Numba optimizations rarely scape form this domain, while Cython is able to optimize a **broader range** of Python applications.

**Pro Cython.** Cython is easier to distribute than Numba, which makes it a better option for user facing libraries. It is hard to install Numba unless you use Conda. 

**Pro Cython**. Cython is also more mature, has a  well-established and open community. Numba developers are not well-known in the open-source community, and the project is sponsored by Anaconda.

#### PyPy

**Pro Cython.** PyPy does not offer the same level of **control** that Cython pro‐ vides—PyPy does what it does, and if the speedup is not satisfactory, there is little that can be done. Cython allows the end user to try many different approaches, moving more code into C or C++ to improve performance [1].

**Against Cython.** Compared to PyPy, the Cython environment can be cumbersome to configure for developers with no C familiarity (scientific computing).





##### References

1 [Cython - A Guide for Python Programmers](http://shop.oreilly.com/product/0636920033431.do)